---
layout: post
title: It's just a notebook
subtitle: 
date: 2023-03-31
author: Jenny Mikac
tags: ["writing", "diaries", "notebooks"]
---
Was reading a discussion in a Discord group wherein people were bitching about Julia Cameron's book _The Artist's Way_ and her morning pages exercise, how she insists that you should write three pages of longhand every morning, stream-of-conscious style. They were whining because those directions were too vague, apparently? They were overly concerned with things like what ruling, what size notebook, what constitutes three pages (I guess a lot of people think "page" and "sheet" are interchangeable?){% marginnote 'mn-pages-vs-sheets' 'FYI: a page is one side of a single sheet of paper. Ergo, a single sheet of paper consists of two pages, or sides. Julia Cameron actually addresses most of these concerns in a [FAQ](https://juliacameronlive.com/2017/09/18/morning-pages-faq/).' %}. And...it just never occurred to me to be concerned about any of that? I bought my preferred notebook and wrote three pages. That's it. Size was irrelevant. My preference for dot grid over lined was irrelevant. None of that fucking matters. And this is how so many people operate: they get so damn hung up on details that literally do not matter, because it all has to have _meaning_, and they end up getting nothing accomplished (not sure if I'm complaining about some poor haggard soul on Discord or myself now). I feel similarly frustrated when I read about people who buy notebooks and then become afraid to write in them because they're worried they will "ruin" them. What does that even mean, to ruin a notebook? As far as I'm concerned, you can't ruin a notebook, unless you render it unusable (like, I don't know, setting fire to it or dunking it in water). But they agonize over things like their sloppy handwriting or misspelling something and I don't fucking get it.{% marginfigure 'mf-wreck-this-journal' 'assets/wreck_this_journal.jpg' 'This fear is so visceral that artist/write [Keri Smith](https://kerismith.squarespace.com/) published a journal intended to be trashed. One of the prompts asks you to rip a page out. Another asks that you mail the journal back to yourself. It was so popular that multiple volumes were created.' %} The whole point of a notebook, or even a sketchbook, is to give you a way to think externally. If you're writing in it, drawing in it, slapping stickers in it, you're using it exactly as intended. Everything else is irrelevant. Anything else is just procrastination in the form of fear. It's just a fucking notebook! It's not your magnum opus! You don't have to weigh it down with meaning and relevance. You're not writing the bible. It's not going in a museum. Maybe. Probably. But no one will want to put it in a museum thousands of years later if you never wrote in the damn thing, and if it didn't somehow reflect the human experience, and you can't reflect the human experience if you're not letting yourself be wholly human on the page. 

I wonder if my devil-may-care attitude towards keeping a diary is because I started keeping one before social media. The caucophony of high-brow journaling on Instagram and even certain parts of Reddit is dizzying. Influencers hoping to get rich off their hobbies have commercialized and commodified the simple act of spilling one's self onto the page. The notebooks posted are surreal, they're so perfect: impeccable handwriting and tightly controlled color palettes. Like an unlived living room in a magazine. No wonder anyone considering exploring this practice are terrified by even the simplest directions: get a notebook and fill three pages in a physical notebook, by hand, by just writing anything and everything that comes to mind. Done. Fin. Nothing less, nothing more. 