---
layout: post
title: Building personal density
subtitle: Talking to dead people, killing our heroes, and creating temporal bandwidth
date: 2023-04-01
author: JRM
tags: ["reading", "books", "developing values"]
---
{% newthought 'I want to talk about old books.' %} So, I have two goals that I'm sometimes embarassed to share, and they're related to each other. Confession? I feel vain, pompous, thinking about these:

- I want to dedicate my reading time to old books. No pop psychology, no pop history, no modern self-help books, no recent fiction. If it wasn't written by a dead person, I'm not particularly interested. I want to read difficult things. Things written by people who lived so long ago that they seem foreign.
- I want to embody my two Internet heroes: Maria Popova and Austin Kleon. This is the part I feel embarassed about, like a little kid with a bad case of Hero Worship. We're supposed to kill our heroes (mentally!) so we can transcend them. They would tell me that they're just some guys, doing the things they love publically. These two have a lot in common, and some very interesting ways that they differ that I think is valuable.
	- Both are voracious readers—much of their free time is dedicated to books.
	- Both are prolific writers & documenters.
	- Austin is a parent, which creates a more intimate connection with him that I don't have with Maria. He accomplishes everything he does with kids in tow, and one that is neurodivergent. My own daughter is in the same boat. And, what's especially important, is that he's conscious of not treating his parenthood as a burden to his art (which is what many childless writers and artists do, they think and treat children as an obstacle, which is something I've come to distrust in people).
	- Austin is very public about the process: the journaling he does, his magpie collecting of quotes and scraps and clippings and stickers and all of the things that light him up. Maria is also a magpie, but she has a much more polished image online. There is no behind-the-scenes. She is a magician, a conjurer. Austin is the old hermit in the woods who mixes up his concotions right before your eyes. I think there is value in both of these archetypes. When do you open the door? When do you close them? How much do you share? When should you enshroud yourself in mystery and hold your secrets tight?

Anyways, I swear this is about old books. I swear there is a thread here and it all makes sense inside my head.{% marginfigure 'mf-conspiracy-wall' 'assets/the_wall.gif' 'Visual representation of brain while writing' %} The problem now is that I walked away from this to get lunch with my family and I've lost said thread. What I wanted to talk about before I got distracted was this idea of personal density, which is something Alan Jacobs writes about in his book _Breaking Bread With the Dead_. In [an interview with The Trinity Forum](https://www.ttf.org/portfolios/online-conversation-oct-2-alan-jacobs/), he sums it up nicely:
{% epigraph %}
There are many, many different reasons why one might study the past, thousands... When you are engaged with the works of the past, you are dealing with difference. You are dealing with people whose whole world is different than yours, people with different experiences, with a different outlook, with different ideas. You’re doing so in an environment that you control. We all know how difficult it can be to try to maintain our patience. We certainly don’t have any shot at serenity. We’re just trying to maintain our patience when we’re dealing with people who we strongly disagree with. But when it’s the voices from the past, and we are visiting their world, and we assume the posture of visitors, of guests, then we can, I think, get a little bit of distance on our emotions. They’re not going to talk back to us. They’re not going to fight back. They’re not going to do anything that will hurt us. If the encounter ends up being a little too intense for us, well, we can just close the book, and go away, and then come back to it later on when we’ve calmed down a little bit. **It is training in encountering difference, but in a way that we have enough control over it, that it doesn’t have to agitate us and frustrate us.** But maybe if we do that for a while, we can get a little better at dealing with our immediate neighbors as well.
{% endepigraph %}

I think the idea is that grappling with old books, written in cultures and societies and timelines that practically seem alien now, is a great way to build up your own opinions, values and beliefs. To me, this is personal density. It's developing your sense of self by being willing to sit with uncomfortable ideas, whether it's because you simply cannot understand them intellectually or because you disagree with them (philosophically, politically, on religious grounds, whatever).  And this sense of self, this personal density, ensures that you're not whipped about by the 24 hour news cycle, the social media timelines, the constant flux of opinions outline the Outrage of the Day. You're not swayed by the bias of recentism. Maria Popova touched on this in [an interview with Krista Tippett](https://onbeing.org/programs/maria-popova-cartographer-of-meaning-in-a-digital-age-feb2019/) for the On Being podcast:

{% epigraph %}
So when you think of anything from a Twitter feed or a Facebook feed to a news website, the most recent floats to the top, always. And it’s always in reverse chronology. And I think that’s conditioning us to believe, rather falsely, that the most recent is the most important, and that the older matters less or just exists less, to a point where we really have come to believe that things that are not on Google or on the news never happened, never existed, or don’t matter. The internet — its beauty is that it’s a self-perfecting organism, right? But as long as it’s an ad-supported medium, the motive will be to perfect commercial interest, to perfect the art of the listicle, the endless slideshow, the infinitely paginated article, and not to perfect the human spirit of the reader or the writer.
{% endepigraph %}

Alan Jacobs referred to this as cultivating your _temporal bandwidth_, a concept he borrowed from Pynchon's _Gravity's Rainbow_, a character in the book defining it as _“the width of your present, your now … The more you dwell in the past and future, the thicker your bandwidth, **the more solid your persona**{% marginnote 'mn-temporal-emphasis' 'Emphasis mine' %}. But the narrower your sense of Now, the more tenuous you are.”_

This is getting longer than I intended, but I've sort of gotten to the bottom of these goals and desires I have: I want to turn to books to help me create a deeper sense of self, and I think I see that embodied by Maria Popova and Austin Kleon. I don't see them grasping onto the social media timeline the way many do. They have their own thing going, and I admire that. And I think the best way to start developing that is to start silent arguments with dusty old dead dudes and their dusty old books ☠. 